Octis, which was formerly known as
Reorg, is today's presenting sponsor on
Business Breakdowns. This is an
essential credit intelligence and data
provider. And they have grown to over
40,000 professionals across leading buy
firms, investment banks, law firms,
advisory firms. And what they're doing
is they're taking the human expertise,
which is so important in credit. They're
embedding it with AI, technology, data
and workflow tools. And that's going to
allow you to unlock all the things you
need, the truths to fuel that decisive
action that you need in the credit
markets. So head over to octis.com to
learn how they have taken this verified
intelligence platform, delivering it at
speed and giving you that complete
picture across the credit life cycle.
You can follow Octis on LinkedIn or X.
there. They will share breaking news and
exclusive coverage and you can find
links to everything in the show notes.
[Music]
>> This is Business Breakdowns.
Business Breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, its business model, its
competitive advantages, and what makes
it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here to bring
them to you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns, check out join colossus.com.
All opinions expressed by hosts and
podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers, or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities discussed in
this podcast. This podcast is
forformational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a basis for
investment decisions.
I'm Zach Fuss and today we're tackling a
giant in a controversial and incredibly
complex industry, the United Healthcare
Group. At its recent Apex, UNH was a
half trillion market cap business, the
15th largest listed business in the
United States. Today, that market cap
sits at just 275 billion. The company
does in excess of $400 billion in sales
annually and produces 40 billion in
ibida as it touches every facet of the
American health care system. To break
down United Healthcare, I'm joined by
Stephanie Nan, a co-PM of the global
sustainable equity strategy within the
sustainable equity team at 91. Stephanie
has been following the company since
2012 and she will help us to unravel
this intricate business. We'll explore
how United Healthcare operates as a
fully integrated health care system from
its insurance arm, United Healthcare,
its namesake, to its high margin health
services business, Optum. We'll provide
a breakdown of the unique and often
inefficient US healthcare ecosystem that
United Health navigates and how the
company has built a powerful flywheel to
drive growth and address systemic
shortcomings in providing care. We'll
also dive into the concept of valuebased
care, the recent headwinds from Medicare
Advantage scrutiny, and whether the
market is mispricing this complex giant
amidst regulatory noise and leadership
changes. We'll do our best to simplify
what is a complicated, complex, and
controversial business and to leave you,
the listener, better informed about the
economic engine and the prospects of UNH
going forward. We hope you enjoy this
breakdown of the United Healthcare
Group.
All right, Stephanie, thank you for
joining us to break down United Health
Group. It comes at a time that is quite
controversial, topical, interesting.
United Healthcare, I think, as a
business is one that is pretty
complicated from the start, but
obviously given the current
circumstances comes with all types of
different questions. But I thought
sticking to the business itself, what is
United Healthcare? How did you come to
learn the business? How would you set
the table for this one?
>> Thank you, Zach, for welcoming me onto
the show. I think most people think of
United Health as a giant US insurer, but
to me that description barely scratches
the surface because United Health isn't
just selling coverage. It's a fully
integrated healthare system. It
incorporates insurance, clinical
assessment, effective delivery of health
care services and in total the company
serves over 150 million people across
its businesses of which a third are
covered by its insurance policies and
the remaining are served within the
company's optimum health care service.
And this is done on an increasingly
integrated basis in a US healthcare
ecosystem really characterized by
fragmentation, inefficiency, and cost
inflation. Now, I've held this stock
since 2012, and over that time, I've
really watched the market repeatedly
mispric and misunderstand its profit
engine. This is a flywheel that turns
between United Healthc Care, its
insurance course, and Optum, its health,
its high margin accelerator. And that
flywheel is really what we're going to
unpack today. Because this episode isn't
just about a company, it's about an
ecosystem. To understand United Health,
you first need to understand the system
it was built for. Because the US
healthcare system is not like most
others. It's fragmented. It's expensive.
and it's structurally unique and
although United Health has no silver
bullet for those challenges, I really do
believe that it has designed itself as a
company, as a business to go some way
towards addressing some of the systems
shortcomings.
>> So to your point, it's nearly impossible
to discuss United Healthcare without
better appreciating the size, scale, and
complexity of the US health care system.
So maybe just a preview on what you need
to understand in order to dive deeper
into how United Healthcare Group serves
that market.
>> Thank you, Zach. That really sets the
stage. So let's start with the basics.
The US spends more on healthcare than
any other highincome country, both as a
share of GDP and on a per person basis.
So in 2024, total US healthcare spending
reached a really significant $5.1
trillion. That's approximately $15,400
per person. And that's nearly double
what Switzerland, which is next on the
list, spends. And the gap holds across
other wealthy nations, too. The UK even
spent around 5,700 per person. Germany
came in around 7,600.
Japan was approximately 5,200 and
Australia was close to 6,000.
And yet, American outcomes aren't much
better. In some cases, they're worse.
Life expectancy, chronic disease
management, access to care are all
underwhelming. Life expectancy in the US
is just 77 years. And that's lower than
in Japan, lower than Australia, lower
than the UK, and lower than Germany. The
US also has a higher infant mortality
rate, the highest obesity rate in the
OECD, and around 30 million people are
still uninsured, leading in turn to
poorer chronic disease outcomes and
delayed care. Why is this happening?
Well, it's partly a function of the wide
income inequality in the US, but also a
big part of it comes down to the
structure of its health care system.
Unlike most OECD countries, the US
doesn't have a universal state-run
system. Instead, we have a hybrid model.
Public and private finance, public and
private delivery. And here's how it
breaks down. So, you have private
insurance, and this covers most people
under 65, mainly delivered through
employers. And then you have public
programs across two main buckets. You
have Medicare and this is for seniors
and people with disabilities with
Medicare advantage then a more enhanced
program which we'll revisit later on
when we discuss value based care which
really is a key part of United Health's
growth story. And the second bucket of
the public programs comes from Medicaid
and this is for low-income families
jointly funded by states and the federal
government. Now, despite the perception
of the US being a private system, public
money actually accounts for over half of
total spending, which is really why it's
such a political hot potato. And it's
not all bad. It's important to recognize
that the US healthcare system is perhaps
the world's most innovative. It leads in
drug development, in novel treatments,
and it dominates medtech. It also offers
more patient choice than pure state-run
systems. However, the flip side of the
choice coin is complexity. Multiple
payers, fragmented providers, heavy
regulation, lots of oversight and
paperwork. Admin costs alone are
estimated to be 30% of that excess
spending gap versus peers. And we also
have to recognize that underlying health
care costs in the US are significantly
higher than we find amongst its peers.
This applies to everything from the
underlying salaries of health care
professionals which in some cases is
more than double for the same role and
also there's the cost of pharmaceuticals
which a 2018 medical journal research
paper found to be about twice the level
found here in the UK. And if that wasn't
all bad enough, you have a principal
agent problem. there is information
asymmetry between the provider and the
patient which increases the risk of
excessive and often expensive
intervention. So despite conventional
opinion, we believe that the US health
care system does have its virtues, but
importantly, it fails to deliver optimal
outcomes for huge swages of the
population. And this means there's a
clear value opportunity for any player
who can cut through that complexity, who
can manage risk, who can drive scale
efficiencies, reduce waste, improve
outcomes. So I hope that's a relatively
high level insight to the world in which
United Health plays. a world that
provides the necessary context to the
journey that United Health has been on
since its inception.
>> And so you have an extremely large
system. It's very expensive. It's highly
complicated. You have private payer,
government payer, I think something like
40% of the country is either on Medicaid
or Medicare. How did United Health Group
go about building itself into this
horizontal and vertically integrated
player in the space?
>> United Health Group started back in 1977
and the idea it was really to make
health care more efficient and
accessible. Health management
organizations, HMOs as UNH was back
then, were a policy brainchild of
Richard Nixon back in 1971. And the idea
really was to give people the ability to
prepay and effectively pull their
sickness and medical cost related risks.
The ambition that really came out of the
Nixon government was that there would be
1,700 HMOs insuring around 40 million
Americans by 1976.
Now, United Health Group founder Richard
Burke was an early starter and he
launched one of the first HMO plans,
Physicians Health Plan, back in 1974.
And by 1977, the year in which he
founded UNH, the development of the nent
HMO industry had somewhat underwhelmed,
it has to be said. So, there were just
165 HMOs serving 6.5 million people. And
it's clear that this was falling well
short of Nixon's targets. And UNH's
Burke really saw these early adoption
challenges as an opportunity. He took
his learnings as an early industry
incumbent and look to scale the UNH
model on a national basis. Now UNH was
very early in turn to an insight that
fragmentation breeds inefficiency. What
began as a fairly traditional insurance
operation which effectively was just
managing indemnity i.e. payment to cover
treatment but no assistance in getting
the best treatment quickly became a
managed care operation which is commonly
called an MCO within the US. This
transition, this movement away from just
that simple level payment structure into
a more broad care operator really moved
towards the idea of MCOs's purchasing
healthcare on behalf of its members.
Now, this was an important development
because it reduced costs and it improved
delivery. And through the 80s and the
'9s, United Health expanded
aggressively. It bought competitors and
it moved into data, into tech, and into
care delivery. And by the time we get to
1998, it rebranded as United Health
Group. This is a name that really
reflected its much broader scope.
Insurance, yes, but also analytics,
pharmacy services and clinical care all
under one roof. The name also maintains
the legacy of its original vision of
that idea of ever integrated healthare
system and today it plays a really
central role in shaping a more
integrated datadriven and value focused
healthare system in the US.
>> Okay. So you've provided what I'd call
an a bridged version of how we built
this behemoth of an MCO and HMO. Bring
us more up to speed with how it's
organized today. So how does United
Health actually work? What makes the
model so effective in this environment?
At its center, we have two big engines.
United Healthcare, the insurance side,
and Optum, the services and tech
platform. United Healthcare underwrites
the risk. Optum delivers care, runs the
analytics, manages pharmacy benefits,
and more. And that's where the flywheel
kicks in. United Healthcare enrolls
members, collects premiums. Optum
delivers services to those members
amongst others and the result is United
Health Group controls the data, controls
the clinical pathways, the cost base and
ensures that best practice is quickly
diffused across the business. And these
two distinct but related businesses
learn from each other despite engaging
in armslength transactions from a
financial perspective. And that loop
keeps turning. Improving insights,
improving pricing, improving outcomes,
improving margin. And now scale really
matters a lot here. So United
Healthcare, the insurance side has over
50 million medical members across
employer, individual and government
plans. That size means better rates with
hospitals and providers. It also means
tighter control over risk and more
stable results. And with this helicopter
view, United Health Group can cherrypick
health care service areas with strong
demand and attractive margins. So you
can see that it can buy into areas that
it sees as really attractive by
purchasing existing providers and then
effectively immediately channeling
funneling huge numbers of patients to
leverage the associated scale
efficiencies. And really to that end its
M&A strategy over the years has been
hugely value accreative. And the M&A
flywheel itself has nuances with UNH
often purchasing its own long-term
providers. Data from Optum helps the
insurance side of the business price
risk more precisely and only in the
delivery side means fewer surprises when
costs hit. So rather than relying on
actuarial luck, the business is driving
margin through operational control. And
because the business is huge, think tech
compliance infrastructure, all of these
costs are spread over a massive base.
And that's why historically you can see
that United Health has out earned peers.
Many of these peers have businesses that
are narrower in focus or have businesses
that just don't enjoy the same degree of
synergy. And to quickly furnish that
comment with some examples, we can see
CVS Health formerly known as Etna as a
large services offering including a big
retail arm which while notionally in
healthcare is more a retail business
than a healthcare business. Fellow MTO
Sigma has a smaller insurance business
and a larger exposure to pharmacy
benefits manager business through its
acquisition of express threads which has
more recently become a real area of
political um certainty. Elevance,
formerly known as Anthem, was late to
this integration insight that we've seen
at United Health and it previously
focused on horizontal M&A, which was
perhaps a distraction as it had a failed
acquisition attempt of Sigma, which
ultimately failed to pass antitrust
scrutiny. Elevance is now making good
strides in its attempt to catch up with
in service delivery, but it really lacks
that full-blown integration that UNH
benefits from with its 70,000 plus
integrated positions in the network. And
then lastly, amongst the larger NCOs,
Humanana is significantly more
concentrated in one area and that's in
the Medicare advantage space. Now, that
was a bit of a quick whip through the
competitive landscape, but what's clear
is that whilst many of those peers are
building out their own service
capabilities, none really have achieved
the same level of revenue contribution,
the same technological sophistication or
the comprehensive integration across
PBM, direct care, data analytics that
option provides to UNH. And this
integrated model really does allow UNH
to not only administer healthare plans
but also directly influence care
delivery. The better balance between
insurance and delivery also means that
UNH is typically less sensitive to
cyclical challenges in particular in
comparison to peers like Humana in with
its Medicare advantage exposure right
now. And the benefits of this tighter
integration are clear. In an industry
with high returns on capital but low
margins, the many incremental gains
compound to an enduring financial
advantage. And since 2014, revenue at
United Health Group has nearly
quadrupled from $110 billion to $400
billion. Importantly to us as long-term
investors during that time free cash
flow per share has compounded as 13%.
And that's well ahead of most invest
benchmarks.
>> Okay. So now that we have an
appreciation for the competitive market
and I appreciate how you simplified
something that's rather complex and
differentiated. The question that I have
is insurance in health care is quite
different than your prototypical
insurance company of which property and
casualty people are most familiar with
where you get insurance premiums and you
reinvest the float or it's life
insurance with long duration. How does
health insurance work in the context of
United Healthcare?
>> Sure. Great question and quite difficult
to understand but really to understand
how United Healthcarees i.e. the
insurance side makes money. We really
need to talk about the kind of
insuranceances in so it's not a super
exciting topic but insurance really can
be grouped into long and short tale
forms. So on the one hand you have life
insurance which is a great example of
longtail form of insurance. You collect
your premiums up front for a liability
or claim exposure that can really last
decades. So here we see lots of
uncertainty and it really requires
capital to be locked up for long periods
of time. However, health insurance isn't
like that and the best way to tag it is
to say it's short tail. So your
liability is time bound to one year and
most importantly you have the ability to
repric every 12 months if you get your
underwriting assumptions wrong. And that
ability to quickly repric means that
while the market might look to
capitalize a profit miss into
perpetuity,
in practice, profit margins can be
quickly rebuilt where there's a rational
competitive backdrop. And I would really
say that is the case within the MCO
today. And ultimately, that's what's
interesting. The company has the ability
to repric its entire book every 12
months. Now, I've heard some investors
describe United Health as something of a
bad bank, but to me that really misses
some of the key distinctions. This is
not a bank where the balance sheet
dwarfs the amount of equity many times
over. And banks also suffer the typical
misfortune of having multiple year
liabilities coupled with an asset
liability duration mismatch. Instead,
every year, United Healthcare can
reassess medical cost trends, regulatory
changes, and risk assumptions, and then
update its pricing to reflect those
inputs. And this is all backed up by
structural cost advantage versus peers.
And that agility makes a business more
resilient. It makes it more interesting
and it makes it more able to respond to
cost shocks.
So when you combine that with the data
flowing in from Optum, you get a
feedback loop but quite rare in
insurance. But the combination of short
tail pricing and integrated proprietary
data from OPTIN gives United Healthcare
an underwriting edge that we really
think is hard to replicate. And that's
why it's been able to deliver such
consistent capital efficient earnings
growth even in relatively volatile
environments. So it's an insurance
business, yes, but one with an
industrial-grade data infrastructure.
It's a pricing engine that turns faster
than most and it has the scale to absorb
shocks that others can't. And that
really sums up the engine that's really
driving that front half of the United
Health flywheel. What is difficult to
understand is you have United Healthcare
which is the insurance company and Optum
which is a health care provider
business.
What exactly is OPTIM? Why was it
brought into the mix here? And I think
there's generally confusion because
United Healthcare is the business that
everyone recognizes the importance of
the profit driver of Optum and how it
plays into the competitive advantages
that the whole group has together.
>> I completely agree. So options been the
bit that people have really overlooked
for over a decade now and I think that's
the bit that's really interesting about
the business going forward. So if United
Healthcare, the insurance segment is the
front engine of the flywheel, it's
pricing risk, it's collecting premiums,
then we can characterize Optum really as
a back half. It's delivering the care,
is managing the risk, and it's capturing
margin in that process. But you're
right, Optum wasn't always part of that
picture. So it was launched back in 2011
under the now returning CEO Steven
Hensley. And the idea really was to
shift United Health from being just an
Azure into a broader healthcare
platform. And with the benefit of
hindsight and the knowledge that
integration drives efficiency, this was
always a natural evolution for the
industry as a whole. But really, United
Health were the first to deliver it at
scale and really deliver it while
maintaining that strong execution. And I
remember back in 2012, I remember when
it really did look like a risky move. I
remember sitting in investor meetings
where around the table there was a lot
of skepticism, a lot of doubt, a lot of
push and pressure really to break the
optimum business apart. And the question
really was why would a successful
insurer jump into the messy business of
healthcare delivery? But really, and
this has turned out to be the case that
skepticism really missed the bigger
picture. Owning the infrastructure of
care, the clinics, the doctors, the data
gave United Health Group control over
the very cost base that its insurance
arm was underwriting. And it wasn't just
about the services, but about the
feedback loops. So, UNH knew that silos
were expensive as they really do
introduce unproductive costs. And
through encouraging greater integration,
UNH was actually reducing costs and
reducing risk. So whilst peers like
Elevant Hill, Sigma Antna toyed with
integration, most never committed, some
tried some mega mergers, most failed to
execute. By contrast, United Health took
the slow and steady route. It went for
these bolt-on vertical integration
rather than the large, the high-profile
horizontal integration. And it really
did build Optin bit by bit. And this is
through smaller targeted acquisitions.
and it really tried and succeeded for a
long time in staying below the radar
even as others really did get bogged
down in regulatory push back. We really
saw that in the mid2010s when there was
a lot of noise and a lot of scrutiny
across the NCO space but today Optim is
a hundred billion revenue business on
its own. It would be a Fortune50 company
if it were a standalone.
>> Can you provide more detail on the Optim
business itself? It really consists of
three main segments. You have Optum
Health which delivers care through
clinics, surgical centers and
increasingly home visits. You then have
Optum Insight which handles data
analytics, handles things like revenue
cycle management. It handles technology
infrastructure. And then the third part
of the Optimum puzzle is Optimum RX. And
this is a pharmacy benefit manager. It
manages job pricing. It looks at rebates
and it looks at formulary optimization.
And between them, those three pieces
together, Optimum Health, Optimum
Insight, Optimum RX, it really gives
United Health that fantastic visibility
across the entire care journey. It can
see from diagnosis to treatment to
billing. That's quite a unique
perspective on what is a very difficult,
very complex industry in the US. And
just one more example there is that
degree of scale within Optum and I think
I've mentioned this already but Optum
Health is the largest employer of
physicians in the US with over 70,000
under contract and that's a huge number
and that just shows the extent of the
reach the extent of the ability to see
before others and integrate that care
delivery and more broadly United Health
thought well how do we move beyond this
fee for service structure that's
traditionally been within the US and
it's become deeply invested in something
called value based care. It has things
called capitation models where providers
are paid not per procedure but per
patient. That's a very different
mindset. It's moving away from that
number of scans, that number of X-rays
into actually how do we cover that
patient and have the best outcomes for
that patient. And that really changes
the incentive structure. So the focus
becomes much more on keeping that
patient healthy, avoiding unnecessary
care, managing cost at source. And
that's a really interesting component
with an optimum health. But you also
have optimum insight working in a
slightly different way. It has a $33
billion revenue backlog. It earns
recurring high margin income and it
delivers tech and consultancy services
across the health services industry and
in effect United Health is taking the
best of its healthcare services knowhow
and it sells it to other healthcare
providers and it really is diffusing
those benefits across a much larger
customer base than you would
traditionally and perhaps initially
expect. And just circle back, this
integration really matters because the
more data, the more touch points, the
more employees on the front line, the
more data Optimum has, the better the
United Healthcare Insurance Arm can
underwrite. And the better the insurance
pricing, the more attractive its plans
become. That drives enrollments and it
brings more patients into the Optimum
ecosystem. And for me, that becomes the
flywheel in action. That's the value
driver. That's the profit engine. And
that's what makes United Health stand
apart as an MCO within its PFA.
>> And so if you think about what is almost
definitionally a vertically integrated
business, you have the insurance
business that is underwriting risk. You
have Optum, which is helping to
facilitate care.
I understand that value based care has
become a pretty big theme and a topic of
conversation as it relates to lowering
the cost of care by eliminating some of
the middlemen.
What is the United Healthcare Group
approach to value based care and why is
it matter as it relates to lowering the
cost of care?
So one of the biggest shift we've really
seen in the US healthcare for the past
decade has been as you touched on this
move away from fee for service
effectively where providers get paid for
doing more towards value based care
where providers are paid for outcomes.
So let's take another step back and just
think about this philosophically. The
highest value intervention that we can
really have and have epism comes from
that ailment that never occurred. So the
earlier the intervention, the earlier a
patient avoids a future chronic disease,
the healthier that patient stays and the
lower the cost of prevention. Now some
of that is to do with the structure of
care. So I'm in London. I'm based in the
UK. And things in terms of treatment, in
terms of first step and interaction with
with the team look a bit different in
the UK. We have a very strong system of
general practitioners known as GPS and
they're broadly equivalent to the
primary care physicians in the US. Now,
while both the GPS in the UK and the
primary care doctors in the US are often
seen as the gatekeepers to more acute
medical intervention, in the UK, GPS
typically lean into more preventative
aspects of healthcare. Now, this is
interesting to me because this means
that UK patients typically tend to have
more interactions with their GPS than
Americans tend to have with their
primary care doctors. I looked at some
data that really showed that in 10
highincome countries, we can see that
American adults are the least likely to
have long-standing relationship with
their primary care doctor. And just to
put some numbers on that, the average
British person sees their GP almost
twice as frequently per year as the
average American. So that first
gatekeeper interaction is quite
different. Now this is despite quite
clear evidence that suggests that in the
US patients with strong primary care um
physician relationships where they do
exist actually report improved disease
management, increased satisfaction and
reduced hospital admissions. So what
this is all saying is that actually
early intervention works and what's
really emerging now and what United
Healthcare is trying to drive is an
incentive structure that rewards early
intervention that encourages Americans
to see that primary point of interaction
earlier to be perhaps a bit more like
the UK and go and see the doctor a bit
more frequently and perhaps at an
earlier stage and that incentive
structure
perhaps keeps a patient healthier for
longer is called value based care and
really United Health has been one of the
strongest voices in the industry talking
up the opportunities of value based care
and really driving that transition and
it's been able to do that because it has
Optum Health. So remember that insurance
sits in H United's healthcare side.
Optimum health sits on the other side of
the business and really UNH has been
putting money into building a network of
embedded physicians within Optimum
Health and these are health care
professionals who are really focused on
reducing sickness occurrence. And this
is often relatively early stage things
that can be about lifestyle
improvements, dietary enhancements, and
the ultimate goal is to stave off that
decline into expensive conditions like
diabetes. So really the more care United
Health can deliver under these value
based models, the more margin, the more
predictability can generate. And it is a
complicated topic. It's difficult for
practitioners, patients, investors to
understand, but really what it looks
like in practice is standardizing of
care protocols, care outlines. It's
about reducing unnecessary procedures
and it's about intervening earlier and
all of this can be helped by data. So
you've got a number of really
interesting different angles here that
come together and really in a fragmented
system such as the US healthare system
this kind of coordination this coming
together is really quite rare and
because United Health controls both the
risk and the delivery it can build these
feedback loops that others just can't.
Whilst you have most insurers really
flying blind by the time the patient
hits the clinic, United Health isn't.
And really for me that is one of the
most important edges that you can see in
this business and it's one of the core
reasons that optimum health really is
such a critical part of that long-term
value creative flywheel within the UNH
business.
>> And so if we kind of bring it all
together, we've touched upon the
structure of the health care system, how
they have this structural competitive
advantage in their go to market in the
pieces that they've built. what has
transpired here that has led that path
astray? And I ask obviously given that
we're now sitting here in May of 2025
and the news flow over the course of the
last 6 months, but specifically the last
90 days has been interesting to say the
least.
>> Been a bit of a rent. I would agree with
you there. But there's lots to talk
about here.
>> Bring us up to speed. What's going on?
>> Okay, so you're right. So, we've been
through the structure of the US
healthcare system. We've talked about
how United Health has built flywheel and
how it prices risk better than almost
anyone else. We've seen option grow to a
platform in its own right. And we've
talked about how valuebased care isn't
just a good policy. It's actually part
of the margin engine, but everything's
not been smooth sailing. As investors,
we like a bit of challenge every now and
then. But some of those recent
challenges have been more tricky and
some of the kind of elements we need to
really reflect on what it means for the
model going forward. For all the
strengths within the United Health
model, Medicare Advantage, one of its
most important growth drivers, one of
its most important engines, has indeed
hit a rough patch. And you're right that
in the last year or so we have seen
those higher than expected medical
utilization numbers especially among
seniors come through. So what we're
seeing more appointments more procedures
more spending and that does matter
because United Healthcare underwrites
that risk while Optum Health in many
cases delivers that care under capitated
contracts. So under capitation, Optum
gets a fixed fee per member regardless
of how much care is used. So when
utilization spikes, Optum does eat some
of that cost. That has in recent
earnings announcements and headlines led
to some margin pressure coming through
in Optimum Health. And that's right when
regulators are starting to ask tough
questions about things like coding
intensity, billing practices within
Medicare Advantage.
It's not just coming from regulators.
We've seen it from the media. The Wall
Street Journal recently published an
article that did raise concerns about
potential fraud related to risk coding
within United Health Medicare Advantage
business. And while the company has
passed regular audits, um the articles
seem to imply that there's deeper
systemic issues here. They're
highlighting discrepancies between
diagnosis coding and care documentation.
How do you as an investor get
comfortable with some of those
accusations?
>> I think we need to really recognize that
there is a difference between an
accusation and a proven bad action. And
we as a team have really been watching
this very closely. Perhaps it could be
argued that UNH has become somewhat a
victim of its own success. So the more
they use data, the more they capture
insights, the more specifically they can
code, the more they come into conflict
with regulators through that process.
And it is a fad that the company has
been very focused on ensuring all
relevant risk factors captured by
physicians. They have worked with
doctors to ensure that risk for patients
are appropriately assessed and priced
for. The real question is whether UNH
placed positions under undue pressure
and this is hard to know I would say but
what we do know is there is a lot of
oversight. UNH underos comprehensive and
pretty regular audits around its codings
and this is the risk assessments looking
for how sick people are. It really does
seem to us that erroneous coding
inflation i.e. coding people as more
sick than they really are would be a
false economy. It would ultimately be
captured by some of these audits and it
would lead to a loss of reputation. And
these audits are pretty in depth and as
far as I'm aware they've not uncovered
evidence of any systematic or illegal
gaming of the system. Coming back to
some of our setup, some of our comments
around the structure of the industry. It
is natural for there to be a tension
between the ultimate funer which is the
US government and the service provider
which is United Health. However, this
tension is heightened by the fact that
we are also dealing with people's health
and there really are few things in life
that are as emotive as securing care
particularly for a loved one at a
difficult time. And every claim has its
individual merits, but an insurer does
have to operate within the bounds of
what it's promised to cover. And I think
again another UK comparison has some
context here. So in the UK, we have an
institution called NICE, which
determines which drugs our health
service will pay for based on a
costbenefit analysis. So sometimes NICE
will reject drugs with proven efficacy
because they believe them to be poor
value for the system as a whole. And we
do have a lot of process here that
really have been focused on specific
patient groups seeing value in those
drugs. However, there's always a
heightened level of suspicion when the
claim officer is also a commercial
entity like the UNH. So NICE works for
our NHS system in the US. But here in
the US, this is a commercial entity.
United Health is a listed business. It's
a for-profit business. The company does
have to continue to show that it is
working within a fair clinical claim
approval process. And all of this adds
to complexity, adds to reputational
overhang, not because fraud has been
proven, but because it reinforces the
narrative that Medicare Advantage plans
may be pushing the boundaries of risk
adjustment with an end goal being to
maximize reinvestment. And just to
reiterate, we have not seen any evidence
to that claim, but we are conscious that
there is an ongoing tension and there
may be a recalibration of what the CMS
accepts as recognized risk factors. Now,
United Health like many in the sector
operates in a space where the rules are
complex and enforcement is evolving. But
the company who were very quick to
respond to many of these accusations
does maintain that it practices are
compliant and its legal success in
challenging recent CMS rating
methodologies does show how nuanced the
regulatory environment is. However, the
scrutiny isn't going away. So the
Medicare Advantage program is likely to
continue to be politically charged and
that's charged on both sides of the
aisle and this really is to be expected
in the country with such a large and
rapidly aging population underpinning a
very quickly rising cost bucket. You can
grow the complexity. So you add in some
more pressures. You add in workforce
inflation. You add in slower than hoped
uptake of accountable care contracts.
You add in some ongoing postcoid
operational issues. All of this comes
together and as we've seen in the market
that narrative around United Health's
invincibility has started to wobble. But
really it's important to zoom out here
because while these are real challenges
they don't to my mind to my team's mind
break the model. What they do reveal is
how tightly linked United Health Care,
the insurance arm and optimum really
are. So when one side underestimates
risk or utilization, the other side
feels it. And that interdependence is
the system's greatest strength, but also
where the stress shows up first. This
perhaps is the right moment to really
pause and ask, well, how much of this is
structural? So how much of this pain?
How much of this volatility that we're
seeing in the business right now is
structural or how much of it is
cyclical? Because if it's the latter, if
it's cyclical, then maybe we're looking
at a reset, not the breakdown that it
seems like the market is pricing. And
the cyclical view really would be
supported by the fact that CO did
generate a Medicare advantage super
cycle as the government prioritized the
continued provision of of coverage with
generous funding across all of the
government programs. And this did lead
to an inflation in things like
supplementary benefits across Medicare
Advantage providers really increasing
costs for the industry as a whole. And
at the same time is during legacy of
COVID we saw rising sickness accurity
for how sick people are across society
on a generalized basis and this has
squeezed margins and it's been felt by
some of the peers within the MCO space
but it seems to have caught up with
United Health really as a bit of a lag
right now and you think the whole
industry is grappling with all of those
inputs right now all of those elements
and repricing considering benefits and
working out ways to adjust this. All of
that is not to say that there's no risk
that this is a structural issue. I've
talked about the attractiveness of the
ability to repric earlier and the
reality is the human body, it doesn't
respect annual pricing cycles. Sickness
will be mismatched to the extent to
which pricing occurs. However, we still
think that this is um directionally
moving into a position where that
valuebased care is coming through and
will increase its market share within
Medicare Advantage recipients.
And just going back to the structural
thesis here, this is where it really
gets interesting and not just from a
healthcare perspective, but really from
a behavioral one. Because if you zoom
out and look at how the market reacted
to this set of issues, it really is
quite telling. We had a murder happen at
the end of 2024. We've had a CEO
departure. We've had headlines about
fraud. We've had regulatory noise and a
real uptick, a real surge in anecdotal
kind of human interest stories around
claim denial. And what followed? What
was the market reaction? Well, we saw a
three standard deviation selloff in the
United Health Group share price. And I
think really what you need to do is ask
yourself this question. Is the stock
market pricing a real breakdown in the
business model or is this behavioral? Is
this reflex selling in the face of
uncertainty? And taking these in turn, I
think it's important to remember we are
no longer talking about the MCO business
model being dismantled, which we have
historically seen. We saw that back in
2016 with Elizabeth Warren and Bernie
Sanders. The current public private
model is now so ingrained it would take
a generation to unwind. So if this
really is a behavioral reaction, if the
stock market really is unsure, then this
to me is an opportunity that isn't just
about me aversion. It's about
recognizing how the market misprices
complexity, especially in companies that
operate across silo sectors or
regulatory frameworks. And really the
point where we've come to is that United
Health isn't easy to model. I'll give
you that. But that doesn't mean it's
broken.
I guess on that point, we've talked a
lot about the qualitative nature of the
business and the quantitative nature of
the market, but not so much about how
the equity markets view the business,
how it's valued. And so maybe we can
just elaborate on what the market has
done here, how it kind of underwrites
the earnings power of this business, and
then ultimately what is going to be the
value driver going forward.
>> Sure. Well, I think before we really get
into the numbers, a quick note. In
recent weeks, we did see the CEO, Andrew
Witty, step down. And just as that news
dropped, the company was already under
pressure, pressure from regulators,
utilization spikes, and broad investors.
And Witty, he was closely aligned with
Optton's expansion. He helped steer
United Health through CO and he oversaw
a stretch of major acquisitions. So his
departure timed alongside these
operational challenges has
understandably amplified the sense of
instability.
But I do think it's worth keeping in
mind when we've seen that volatility in
the market that United Health has a long
history of executing through leadership
changes. The strategy is embedded. So
the stock to your weight is sold off
hard, three standard deviations below
normal. And essentially what our
analysis suggests to us is that the
market is telling us that the
competitive mode of the business is
eroding or gone together. And that leads
us to a key question. What if the market
is just reacting to noise? So is it
these temporary utilization spikes? Is
it political rhetoric? Is it leadership
headlines? These are all inputs, but
they're not. And so we still see the
core mechanics of the flywheel as
intact. United Healthcare is repricing
risk annually. Optimum is reducing costs
through integrated care. And the
valuation gap that's out there in the
market to my mind says more about
investor psychology than it does about
fundamentals.
And so if we take a step back and set
aside the recent dramatics relating to
the business and its model, what is it
that's driving the structural
competitive advantages that United
Healthcare has relative to its peers in
Medicare Advantage and private pay
insurance? Okay, great question because
if there's one area that United Health
really is building a long-term
compounding advantage, it's in data and
it's in technology. And through Optimum
Insight, United Health has access to one
of the largest longitudinal health data
sets in the country. This spans clinical
data, claims history, pharmacy
interactions, and really broad
population health trends. And it's not
just about the size of that data set.
It's also about how they use it. So,
United Health really has lent in early
to things like machine learning to AI
across the business. It uses predictive
algorithms to stratify patient risk to
anticipate disease progression and even
flag kind of non-adherence to
medication. So, this is you're not
taking your pills at the right time.
United Health will intervene will come
and try to ameliate that situation.
Ultimately, it's allowing clinicians to
intervene earlier and this is really
important to protect margin in value
based contracts. It's also on the admin
side. So we talked earlier about how the
flip side of that degree of choice in
the US healthcare system comes with a
lot of admin cost is one of the largest
differential price items in the US
healthcare system against other national
systems and United Health has used AI to
really streamline claims processing to
detect fraud and ultimately to improve
billing accuracy and timing delays etc.
It can also use AI within its PVM within
Optimx using algorithms to improve
primary placement and automate things
like outreach for refills. And what
really sets aside United Health and I
think this probably won't surprise you
that I'm about to say this, but it's
about the integration of the tech. So
most people use AI in silos. I see that
in businesses across all sectors at the
moment. But the real value creation I
believe is and will continue to be where
that AI can be integrated across many
different working streams. United Health
is embedding it across the entire
workflow. So it's going from risk
prediction to care delivery to cost
containment. A way to think about this
is to take a patient. So a high risk
diabetic is flagged in the optimum
system. That flag leads to a proactive
scheduling of a teley health check-in.
That telly health check-in continues to
flag that patient as perhaps high risk.
A nurse will then visit the home the
next day. The nurse can then adjust the
pharmacy benefit in real time and the
insurer can also adjust the risk score.
All of this then feeds back into the
pricing system. That's not theoretical.
That's just the operational reality of
the business and that can happen at
scale. So all of the models within
United Health have that data advantage.
They're training on fresh data across 50
million lives and that advantage just
really becomes selfreinforcing.
And if you compare to some of the other
MCOs, United Health has got beyond that
point of wiring these components
together. It's already shifted the
mindset. is already thought about
integrating tech, integrating insights
and it really is building what I would
say is a real time operating system for
healthcare and I think the value of it
is only just beginning. So, it's
impossible to talk about the health
insurance industry without the gorilla
in the room being the political risk
under the current administration from
the perspective of cutting costs and
also just broader reimbursement rates as
it relates to the cost of drugs.
How do you assess and underwrite the
regulatory risk inherent in a lot of the
change coming out of DC? So the
political risk itself is complex and and
I was talking to a colleague earlier and
it really could be a podcast in itself
but we'll try and keep it simple and
really focus on the bigger role that
United Health is playing in the story.
So when Trump came back into the White
House, the regulatory environment for
healthcare really has elevated in its
lack of predictability. And that lack of
predictability isn't necessarily
hostile, but to its point, it is
unpredictable. And there is reflecting
why this is and why MOS been in the
spotlight so much. I think there is a
really nice political narrative for many
politicians out there to blame the broad
health care system for failings and to
blame it on those big financial
institutions such as the MCO rather than
shifting the lens elsewhere. It's
politically agreeable to go after the
big companies rather than perhaps look
into doctor salaries, look into other
components perhaps of the system that
don't resonate so well. And it really
does resonate well. We've seen a lot of
angst across the country. We see it in
the media. We saw a lot towards the back
end of last year. And it really comes
from that element where as the patient,
the MTOS are the people that you make
payments to, you pay your excess to them
and they're also the ones that tell you
what you can and cannot get. You know
coming back to that idea of healthcare
is a very emotive topic a very emotic
time in your life that interaction with
the MCOs's
can be difficult and compiling that with
the political narrative really has
resonated well within the US system and
we saw it with Trump under his first
administration. He went after a number
of different programs. He tried to roll
back the affordable care act. He also
tried to relax oversight in other areas
and really tackle the PBMs, but all of
that was difficult.
It was difficult because you need
multiple elements of agreement and it's
a complex system, but it could come
back. So, we have seen some media
speculation. We have seen that idea that
executive driven disruption could be
back on the agenda and United Health
does have exposure. So Medicare
Advantage is a huge part of the
business. PBMs are under bypass and
scrutiny and integrated players like
United Health are always in political
crosshairs when profits look relatively
attractive. However, in our opinion,
true fundamental changes to the US
system would need congressional
approval. And in all this uncertainty,
the one thing that is clear is that
there's no consensus. There's no
agreement on really what an alternative
offering would look like. You don't see
that on a bipartisan basis. And you
don't even see it within the Republican
party. So yes, the US healthcare system
needs to be cheaper, but it's unclear
where those compromises need to be made.
I'm not really here to answer that
question as such. But what I do know is
that United Health has a track record of
navigating very successfully many
different ways of reform. So they
navigated the Obamacare APA roll out.
Well, they navigated the Medicare rate
adjustments we've seen before. They've
been through the Medicare for all
rhetoric of Warren and Sanders. United
have adapt. It changes is nimble and it
often comes out stronger. The company
can adjust contracts. It can rebalance
incentives and if needed osmoly can
absorb some margin in exchange for
stability.
Where we come up really is that
regulation could end up in consolidating
share amongst some of the best
capitalized players and that could be in
United Health Group's advantage. So to
summarize, yes, political risk is real,
especially when drug pricing and large
financial institutions are in the
spotlight, but United Health has managed
these risks before. It's been agile.
It's used at scale. It's had a tight
grip on data, and we feel pretty
confident that it will continue to
navigate as the political situation
unfolds. Just to push on that point a
little bit, it seems like the
degradation in earnings recently has
been a function of medical loss ratio
specifically attributed to Medicare
advantage. And so I guess obviously
there's this highly regulated and
complex business that's always under
scrutiny, but what is it about MA in
particular that has introduced another
layer of challenge to the business more
recently? The Medicare Advantage isn't
just a big revenue line for United
Health. It's also one of the most
tightly regulated and perhaps
politically sensitive parts of the
business. And there is a perception out
there and fair or not that Medicare
Advantage is a bit of a wild west when
it comes to coding, when it comes to
reimbursement and when it comes to plan
design. But in our opinion, the truth
really is that this is one of the most
audited, the most closely monitored
programs in US healthcare. The CMS
conducts risk assessment reviews, it has
regular audits, there's a star rating
evaluation system across Medicare
Advantage plans. So while there is room
for interpretation in coding, there's
not much room for fraud. And I really do
think that distinction matters because
the recent headlines around overcoding
can skew public perception. In reality,
what we're often seeing is aggressive
perhaps optimization within a gray zone
that the whole industry has been
operating in. One key metric to watch is
the CMS's staff rating system. So this
is a system that evaluates Medicare
Advantage plans on clinical quality on
patient satisfaction and on
administrative performance and those
scores directly affect reimbursement
plans with four stars or more get a
quality bonus. And United Health
consistently outperforms here. So for
2024, for the plan year, around 79% of
United Healthc Care's Medicare Advantage
members were enrolled in plans rated
four stars or higher. And that is above
the industry average of 71%. And you've
also seen United Health successfully
challenge CMS rating methodology in
court. So they've gone back to the CMS
and led to a re-evaluation of at least
12 of its contracts. Three of those were
upgraded to four stars and two of them
went to the top rating of five stars.
And you've seen a different performance
at some of the peers. So for example, if
Humana, its fourstar coverage has
dropped dramatically of late, jammed to
just 25% of members from somewhere in
the '9s the year before. And I think
that performance gap really does
underscore United Health's operational
discipline, but also its ability to
consistently meet quality and
administrative thresholds in what really
is one of the most heavily regulated
parts of the US healthcare system. And
to me that speaks volumes about its
execution abilities.
Now style rating is one thing but we can
also look at net promoter scores and
these known as NPS measure how likely a
member is to recommend the plan to
friends to peers family members and
sometimes these scores these MPS's
diverge from those star ratings. So a
plan might be clinically sound but score
poorly on service of complexity and
reputational risk doesn't always sharpen
the numbers. Interestingly though, UNH
has reportedly started approving a
higher percentage of claims. The logic
ease easing of reputational pressure. So
you show good faith to the regulators
and to the public and that's not free.
So, it raises near-term costs and the
upside is this is a discretionary shift
that we really do think is underway at
United Health, but it's not a structural
margin problem. It can be reversed and
recalibrated. And really, what I'm
trying to say here is that there are
different levers that United Health can
use to really navigate challenges. It
can use different levers to navigate
stars ratings to navigate NPS's but I
don't think that any of those levers are
structurally broken and it can adapt and
what this really highlights is a core
advantage to the United Health model and
that's control. So with visibility
across pricing across delivery and
across claims it can dial up cost
structures or dial them down in response
to outside pressure. And it's that
adaptability that I want to communicate
today. It's so rare and especially rare
in a sector that's as regulated and and
as emotionally charged as healthcare. I
would wrap all of this up and say the
scrutiny out there is real. The noise is
loud, but United Health still has the
tools. It still has the data and it
still has the scale to play offense
while others are stuck reacting. Our
concluding question comes in two forms.
In your study of United Healthcare
Group, what are lessons that you've
learned from the way that they operate
their business and navigate that can be
applied to the management of other
businesses? And then as an investor,
what about the United Healthcare story
do you borrow and apply to other
prospective investments?
>> I think I'd answer the same to both of
those elements actually. I think there's
a lot of evidence here that being brave
but looking ahead and predicting trends,
sticking with them, committing capital
to them, committing talent, staying the
course and building out a business like
Optum has a lot of lessons for life more
broadly. So look ahead, look for changes
and back those changes if you believe
that that is the future. I think that's
a really powerful message and it goes
back to the start of my time at 2012. It
goes back to those first meetings that I
had with a company where other investors
were saying, "Oh, this is a sum of the
parts story. It needs to break up."
Well, no. The business saw the future.
It saw where the likely value creation
drivers for the whole industry is going
and it was brave. It stepped up and it
committed capital. A related element to
that is adaptability. So changing, so
being prepared to not only see a new
vision, back a new vision, but really
adapt to fit that vision and play the
best game that you can. Be nimble, be
agile, break things if you need to,
change things if you need to. And I
think that has so many lessons for us
all. For us particularly as investors as
we think about the opportunities and the
changes that AI is bringing to the way
we interact with the world, the way we
interact with each other and the way we
think about our generation in the
future.
>> Stephanie, packing the United Healthcare
group story into 60 minutes is not an
easy task and I appreciate you doing
this. When we first discussed doing
United Healthcare, I think I described
the company as audacious and I think
you've done it justice. I think we could
probably go on for a few more hours and
digging into some of the idiosyncrasies
of what's going on here and how the
business operates, but I think this is a
wonderful on-ramp for those looking to
learn about the business.
>> Thank you for your time. I've really
enjoyed it. To find more episodes of
breakdowns ranging from Costco to Visa
to Madna or to sign up for our weekly
summary, check out join colossus.com.
That's jolsus.com.
[Music]